

This paper discusses the design of the Micro-Machinations (MM) library (MM-Lib) and how Cascade, a meta-language for expressing Domain-Specific Languages (DSLs) with interface- and feedback-mechanisms, helps to express the liveness of MM's core language features. MM programs are directed graphs that control the internal economy of running digital games, and converters can be rewritten as a combination of a drain, a trigger and a source. Cascade is used to express the dependencies between the abstract syntax and the run-time state, and to add traceability of cause-and-effect for all changes. It also expresses the effects of resource triggers as a fixedpoint computation. Cascade is a generic REPL (read-eval-print-loop) with limitations, and lacks a debugger for exploring histories, inspecting cause-and-effect chains, and tracing source locations. To demonstrate the behavior of MM, a prototype was created using Vie, a tiny live game engine. The Cascade framework consists of a compiler written in Rascal and Delta, a runtime written in C#. Delta offers a built-in Read-Eval-Print-Loop (REPL) for simulating live programming scenarios. When Delta executes events, it generates transactions as cause-and-effect chains. These transactions update a live program’s syntax and run-time state. LiveSML, an event-based language design, is used to illustrate how Cascade works. Delta supports operations on objects, lists, sets, and maps, such as creating new objects, setting and deleting fields, inserting and removing elements from lists, adding and removing elements from sets, and adding, setting, and removing elements from maps. The paper also introduces LiveQL, a programming language that enables forward references and allows changes to running forms, and the Questionnaire Language (QL), a DSL for expressing interactive questionnaires. Future work includes creating a reusable omniscient debugger for change-based DSL environments, expressing coupled transformations, and automating the development of UIs that leverage game engine technology.
