2. A global method cache, indexed on class+selector pro-
vides a 20%-30% performance improvement[9].

3. After the lookup described above, the target method is
cached in the calling code, so the next time we do the
lookup we should be very fast. This caching gets com-
plicated because there could be objects from another
class in a subsequent execution, so somewhat complex
mechanisms are used to save the multiple method tar-
gets. However the evidence[4, 13] is that about 90%
of dynamic call-sites will have a single receiver class,
another 9% will have 2–8 classes. Miranda claims[13]
that most of the dispatch overhead (5%–10% of total
execution time) is burned in the remaining 1% of sends
with many classes.

2.3 Java Dispatch
Java has five opcodes to invoke methods, but the primary one
we are interested in is invokevirtual[16] which does
virtual dispatch with the same semantics as Smalltalk.

The difference is that the Java compiler statically knows
the index into the dispatch table of each method call, so there
is no need for a dictionary lookup. The dispatch table for
each class has a prefix of a copy of the dispatch table from
its superclass, followed by the methods defined in this class.
Any methods that override superclass methods replace the
corresponding method in the prefix. Since the names of all
of the legal methods are known, finding the method for a

2In a very early version of Pharo/Squeak sending ifTrue: to a non-
Boolean object required accessing thisContext and moving the pro-
gram counter back. Pharo now de-compiles such a failed branch and does a
send, but in a recent version this exposed a Heisenbug.

particular name requires a simple index (which does not
even have to be range checked).

The same thing could be done for Smalltalk, if we knew
which class the object was an instance of. Failing that, for
every class (there are over 20,000 classes in a recent Pharo
image), we would have to have a dispatch table with an entry
for all message names (there are over 62,000 method names
in the same image).

Even if we somehow knew the class of the object, the tables
would still be excessive because of the size of the Smalltalk
Object class compared with the Java Object class. The Java
Object class only has 11 methods, whereas the Smalltalk
Object class has over 460 methods.

Because the dispatch table for every class has a prefix
from all super-class methods, this means that the table for
every class would start with 460 methods. While this is a
significant improvement, it is still excessive (and would have
horrible cache locality).

2.4 Optimal Dispatch
Even with the Object class having so many methods, if we
had complete information of the types of the receiver for
every Smalltalk message send, we could theoretically create
unified mappings for all classes, so that all methods could be
looked up by simple indexing into the vtable (i.e. creating a
perfect hash). This would reduce the overhead of dispatch to
a very low level, but for a complete system would have hun-
dreds of megabytes of dispatch table. However, if generating
a stand-alone executable from a given target class and its
transitive closure of classes and methods, this is potentially
a tenable option.

3 New Dispatch
With these considerations in mind, our goal must be to:
• inline everything possible so that code is mainly
branches – which are handled well by modern hard-
ware – and to minimize dynamic dispatches;
• make that inlining principle-based, rather than based
on heuristics of appropriate selectors;
• where dispatch is necessary, minimize the complexity
– a single hashed lookup should be the goal;
• interact with other threads as rarely as possible.
The principle is to have a single flat dispatch table for
each class, which includes not just the methods of the class,
but also all the inherited methods that have been invoked.
The methods listed in the vtable are from anywhere in the
hierarchy, but only methods that have actually been sent to
any instance of this class, in any thread.

3.1 The Dispatch Table
Symbols have a 32-bit ‘hash’ value that is composed of a 24-
bit unique id, and the arity of the symbol. Building perfect
hash tables is not feasible (as they end up too large, take too


Table 1. Relative execution time of hash functions

Calculation
key *% rand *size >> 32
(key^(key>>5))&size
key%size

M1 factor
1.0
1.3
3.0

i7 factor
1.0
1.1
8.5

Because the dispatch does not need to compare the selector
with keys in the method dispatch table, the table is half the
size, which should improve cache locality. Rather, the method
code compares the selector against the correct one for that
method.

long to build, or take too long to calculate).[2, 5, 18] However
it is important to not waste too much space with these tables,
while retaining constant time lookup.
3.1.1 Building the Table. The most obvious aproach to
hashing is to use a mod function to calculate the remainder
of the symbol’s hash value modulo the size of the table.
Unfortunately, this is very slow on modern hardware. We
can perform the same calculation with 2 multiplies and a
shift.

First we perform a 32-bit multiply of the 32-bit key value
and 232
Φ function to spread the keys out over the 32-bit space.
This is then multiplied by the size of the table and shifted
right 32 bits, resulting in a value 0 ≤ 𝑥 < 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒. As shown in
table 1, this is between 3-times faster than mod on an Apple-
M1 processor, and 9-times faster on an Intel-i7 processor.
The xor function is almost as fast (only 8% to 34% slower),
but does not spread the hash values nearly as well as our
approach and only works for power-of-two sizes.

One complication is the handling of super methods. A
common pattern is to have a method handle part of a prob-
lem, but with a fallback to the same-named method in the
superclass. With all methods for a class and its superclasses
compiled into one dispatch table, we have to differentiate
the superclass methods, which we do with some unused bits
in the Symbol object. With inlining, described in §4, this
problem is obviated by the super call usually being inlined.
3.1.2 Dispatching. Dispatching involves several steps:

1. Extract the class number from the target object (this
is encoded in the object for immediate objects, or in
the header for in-memory objects);

2. Index into a static table of pointers to class dispatch
objects - each of which has an array of code pointers;
3. Extract the hash value from the message selector and

multiply by the multiplier and the size;

4. Index into the array of code pointers, and make a
threaded (indirect) call passing the selector (as well as
other registers);

5. if this was a position that corresponds to an unassigned
hash value, it will point to the NotFound code (see
below).

6. if this is code of a regular method, it checks if the
selector matches the selector for that method - if not,
it calls the NotFound code.