Title-Abstract. Section intro
 about
two separate code-bases: the analyzed code and the analysis
implementation. The former is usually where the bug man-
ifests itself, while the latter contains the faulty implemen-
tation. A recent survey has found that analysis developers
prefer to reason about the analyzed program, indicating that
debugging would be easier if debugging features such as
(conditional) breakpoints and stepping were also available
in the analyzed program. In this paper, we therefore propose
cross-level debugging for static analysis. This novel technique
moves debugging features such as stepping and breakpoints
to the base-layer (i.e., analyzed program), while still making
interactions with the meta-layer (i.e., analysis implementa-
tion) possible. To this end, we introduce novel conditional
breakpoints that express conditions, which we call meta-
predicates, about the current analysis’ state. We integrated
this debugging technique in a framework for implement-
ing modular abstract interpretation-based static analyses
called MAF. Through a detailed case study on 4 real-world
bugs taken from the repository of MAF, we demonstrate how
cross-level debugging helps analysis developers in locating
and solving bugs.
CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering → Auto-
mated static analysis; Software testing and debugging.

SLE ’23, October 23–24, 2023, Cascais, Portugal
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
This is the author’s version of the work. It is posted here for your personal
use. Not for redistribution. The definitive Version of Record was published in
Proceedings of the 16th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Software
Language Engineering (SLE ’23), October 23–24, 2023, Cascais, Portugal, https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3623476.3623512.

Keywords: Static Program Analysis, Debugging

ACM Reference Format:
Mats Van Molle, Bram Vandenbogaerde, and Coen De Roover.
2023. Cross-Level Debugging for Static Analysers. In Proceedings
of the 16th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Software
Language Engineering (SLE ’23), October 23–24, 2023, Cascais, Portu-
gal. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 12 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3623476.3623512

1 Introduction
Static analyses derive run-time properties of programs with-
out actually running them. They provide the foundation for
tools such as Integrated Development Environments, opti-
mizing compilers, and quality assurance tooling. Termination
is an important property for any static analysis, stating that
the analysis always terminates even when the program under
analysis does not. In application contexts such as compilers,
analyses also ought to be sound, meaning that their results
account for any possible execution of the program under
analysis. For example, an analysis that determines whether
integers can be stored in a unsigned variable, should only
state that an expression will evaluate to a positive integer if
this is the case for every possible program execution.

Unfortunately, analysis developers may make mistakes
while trying to realise these properties. Such mistakes are of-
ten hard to locate and therefore fix. Debuggers have proven
themselves as tools for locating the source of problems in
an application. However, as Nguyen et al. [7] found in a sur-
vey conducted amongst 115 analysis developers, traditional
debuggers are ill-suited for debugging a static analysis:

• Debugging target mismatch: a traditional source-level
debugger targets the code of the analysis implemen-
tation. However, a bug usually manifests itself in an
analyzed program. Therefore, for analysis developers,
it can be easier to reason about the behavior of the
analysis by looking at a specific analyzed program,
rather than debugging the static analysis as a whole.
Stepping features of the debugger should therefore
also be able to target the analyzed program, rather
than the analysis implementation itself.
• Generic visualisation: debuggers show generic infor-
mation (e.g., the value of variables in the current call
frame) about the implementation of a static analy-
sis. As static analyses typically follow the same struc-
ture, domain-specific visualisations can be developed.


SLE ’23, October 23–24, 2023, Cascais, Portugal

Mats Van Molle, Bram Vandenbogaerde, and Coen De Roover

Nguyen et al. find that these domain-specific visualisa-
tion help to understand the behaviour of the analysis,
and help to locate bugs.

from traditional debuggers are inadequate:

In this paper, we argue furthermore that the breakpoints
• Shifting breakpoints to the base layer: traditional de-
buggers that target the analysis implementation do not
support placing breakpoints in the analyzed program.
This makes debugging more difficult, since the analy-
sis developer cannot easily suspend the analysis when
a particular point in the analyzed code is reached.
• Domain-specific conditional breakpoints: conditional
breakpoints enable developers to limit the number of
times a debugged program is suspended at a break-
point. Similar to regular breakpoints, we argue that
the conditional ones ought to be placed in the analyzed
code. However, they must be cross-level, meaning that
they do not only express properties of the analyzed
program (base level), such as the contents of an in-
scope variable, but also properties about the global
analysis state (meta level) at the point of its evalua-
tion. Predicates for conditional breakpoints therefore
become domain-specific, which renders expressing
properties about the analysis state easier compared to
expressing them in terms of implementation-specific
data structures.

1.1 Contributions
In this paper, we propose cross-level debugging for static anal-
ysis. More specifically, we propose a debugger that moves
stepping and breakpoints features to the analyzed program
(base level), while still allowing for expressing properties
about the analysis implementation (meta level) as conditional
breakpoints. To this end, we propose domain-specific meta-
predicates that can be used to formulate analysis-specific
conditional breakpoints. Our debugger therefore crosses the
boundary between the base level and meta level, and becomes
cross-level. In summary our contributions are as follows:
• A novel debugging technique for static analysis called
cross-level debugging, which includes domain-specific
visualisations and stepping features that can step through
each individual step of the analysis.
• Three categories of domain-specific meta-predicates
that can be used as the conditions for our cross-level
conditional breakpoints.
• An implementation for this debugger using MAF, a
framework for implementing modular analyses for
Scheme.

1.2 Motivating Example
We motivate the need for cross-level debugging of static anal-
ysis implementations through a hypothetical sign analysis
that does not properly allocate the parameters of a function.

The bug manifests itself during the analysis of the following
Scheme program:

1
2
3
4
5

; define a function named "add"
(define (add x y)

(+ x y))

; call the "add" function
(add 5 2)

When executed by a concrete interpreter, the program
evaluates to 7. The corresponding analysis result for this
program should be the + element of the sign lattice of ab-
stract values (or its ⊤ element in case sound imprecisions
are allowed). Imagine that the hypothetical sign analysis
produces the ⊥ lattice element instead, denoting the absence
of sign information.

Without prior knowledge about this bug, it may be unclear
what part of the analysis is to blame. Several analysis compo-
nents may be at fault: the implementation of the abstraction
of literals 5 and 2 to sign lattice elements, the implementa-
tion of the abstract + operation on these lattice elements,
or the implementation of the abstract semantics of function
calls and returns.

Inspecting the state of the analysis at the corresponding
points in the analysed program would help to locate the
bug in the analysis implementation. Unfortunately, regular
debuggers are not well-equipped for this task. First, the anal-
ysis implementation does not exactly mirror the structure of
the analysed program. Steps through the analysis implemen-
tation therefore do not necessarily correspond to steps in
the analysed program. This motivates the need for moving
stepping and breakpoint features to the analyzed program
(base level) rather than the analysis implementation (meta
level).

Second, regular debuggers do not understand the structure
of the analysis state. For example, at line 3, it is expected
that the analysis knows about variable 𝑦 in the program
under analysis. Although a regular debugger can visualize
the state of the analysis implementation in terms of local
and global variables, it does not provide an effective way
to visualize the contents of, for example, the environments
and stores that the analysis is manipulating. This motivates
the need for domain-specific visualisations that show the
analysis state on a more abstract level, rather than in terms
of implementation-specific data structures.

Third, regular debuggers do not support analysis develop-
ers in formulating and testing hypotheses about the source
of a bug in terms of program points from the program un-
der analysis. For example, if the analysis developer suspects