Title-Abstract. Section intro
predicate evaluator.

Table 2. Summary of bugs from the Github repository.

Commit Description
a2f43f6
1a3c6be
08bbe43 Variable arguments are ignored
8b98b9b Unnecessary triggering of effects

Implemented car as cdr
vector-set! ignores its own index

3.3.3 Predicate evaluator. Conditional breakpoints are
evaluated in a separate evaluator which we call the meta-
predicate evaluator. This evaluator has access to the current
state of the analysis but cannot change it. Although the meta-
predicate evaluator evaluates arbitrary Scheme expressions,
these Scheme expressions cannot influence the results of the
program under analysis. We argue that this is necessary for
a clear separation between the debugging facilities and the
analysis implementation to be maintained. The interactions
between the debugger, static analyser, and meta-predicate
evaluator are depicted in fig. 2.

The evaluation of a meta-predicate proceeds as follows.
First, the break expression is analyzed by the static analysis
(1). Then, since the static analyzer does not include semantics
for evaluating predicates of those break expressions, the
predicate expression 𝑒 is passed to the predicate evaluator
(2). Third, the predicate evaluator computes the truth value
of the predicate 𝑒 by querying the state of the static analysis
(3). Finally, the computation results in a boolean value (true
or false) which is returned to the static analysis (4). Based on
this value the debugger decides whether to pause the analysis
and show intermediate analysis results in its interface (5).
4 Evaluation
In this section we evaluate our approach through a case
study. We first discuss the details of this evaluation method,
and then demonstrate how our debugger supports locating
4 real-world bugs in the implementation of MAF.

4.1 Evaluation Method
We evaluated our approach by querying the MAF repository
on Github1 to find soundness related bugs. To this end, we
queried for keywords such as: “bug” and “fix”, From the
1https://github.com/softwarelanguageslab/maf

DebuggerStatic analysisPredicate Evaluator(break e)(1)etrue/false(2)(3)(4)(5)true/false
Cross-Level Debugging for Static Analysers

SLE ’23, October 23–24, 2023, Cascais, Portugal

results of this query we selected 4 real-world soundness bugs
which are summarized in table 2. Additionally, to illustrate
how termination issues can be debugged, we introduced a
synthetic bug that affects the worklist algorithm.

Then, based on the fixes introduced in the aforementioned
commits, we reintroduced the bugs back into the analysis
itself, adapting the bug to the current state of the framework
if necessary. Each case corresponds to one re-introduced bug
in isolation, in order to avoid the effects of multiple bugs in-
fluencing each other and to replicate the precise environment
in which the bug was originally found and fixed.

4.2 Studied Cases
The following cases correspond to re-introduced bugs found
in the MAF repository, and to one synthetic bug introduced
specifically to study the effectiveness of our worklist meta-
predicates. For each case, we first detail the corresponding
real-world or synthetic bug, then we show how it was re-
solved, before describing a scenario of successive interactions
with our debugger that will lead to the bug being located.
In the remainder of this section, we use
to indicate the
location of a breakpoint.
4.2.1 Implemented car as cdr. In Scheme, pairs are con-
structed using the primitive cons. For example, the expres-
sion (cons 1 2) denotes a pair that consist of 1 as its first
element (also called the car) and 2 as its second element (also
called the cdr). In the bug studied in this first case, the car
value was used for both the car and cdr of the pair allocated
in the store.

We illustrate this bug in the program depicted below. This
program provides an implementation for a bank account.
The account is represented by a pair consisting of the ac-
count name and the current balance of that account (line 1-2).
The functions add-to-balance (line 3-4) and balance (line
5-6) change and retrieve the balance of the bank account
respectively.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

(define bankAccount

(cons "Lisa" 1983))

(define (add-to-balance account amount)

(set-cdr! amount(cdr account))))

(define (balance account)

(cdr account))

(add-to-balance bankAccount 10)
(balance bankAccount)

The analysis result for this program, produced by the
buggy analysis implementation, is the pointer to Lisa in-
stead of the expected value integer, rendering the analysis
unsound.

Instrumenting the abstract definitional interpreter to out-
put the analysis state at each evaluation step results in a
large amount of unstructured information. Instead, we are
interested in the analysis state for specific locations in the
analyzed program. Recall that the store shows that the value
of balance is string. To find the origin of the bug we start
by checking whether bankAccount is still a pair consisting

of a string and an integer after changing its balance. To
this end, we place the following breakpoint before ‘(balance
bankAccount)’ (line 8 breaks whenever the contents
of the store has the expected structure.
(break (and

(lattice:pair? (store:lookup "bankAccount@1:9"))
(lattice:string? (lattice:car (store:lookup "bankAccount@1:9")))
(lattice:integer? (ice:cdr (store:lookupAccount@1:9")))))
The inserted breakpoint does not suspend the analysis, mean-
ing that the address does not point to a cons cell of the ex-
pected structure. Therefore, the bug has already occurred in
 part of the program. A possible culprit
the set-cdr! primitive, which mutates the cdr component
of a pair. To test this hypothesis, we place the same break-
point beforeto-balance (line 7). Again our analysis
does not suspend, meaning that the structure of the pair is
not affected by set-cdr!. Therefore the primitive cons itself
could be the source of the bug. We test this by using the same
breakpoint, but placing it right after the allocation (line 2).
Again, this breakpoint does not result in a suspension of the
analysis. We have now located that the implementation of
cons itself is most likely to blame. To test this hypothesis,
we reduce our conditional breakpoint to break whenever
the cdr contains a value of an unexpected type (i.e., a value
other than an integer).

(break (not (lattice:integer?

(lattice:cdr (store:lookup "bankAccount@1:9"))))

Finally, the analysis suspends, which means that the bug
resides in the implementation of the abstract allocation of
the pair.
4.2.2 vector-set! ignores its own index. In Scheme,
vectors represent collections of a fixed size whose elements
can be accessed in constant time. A vector can be allocated
using the make-vector primitive which needs the length
of the vector and an initial value for each position in the
vector. Lookup and mutation are provided using primitives
vector-ref and vector-set! respectively. In this example,
we investigate a bug in the latter primitive.

The bug is located in the implementation of vector-set!.
Recall that in order for an analysis to be sound, it must ac-
count for all possible program behavior. To this end, the
implementation of vector-set! must join the previous val-
ues