Title-Abstract. Section intro
 backed by an effect-
driven worklist algorithm. Components are re-analyzed when
one of their dependencies changes. We say that a depen-
dency triggers the reanalysis of a component, meaning that
the component is added to the worklist for reanalysis. For
example, the analysis result of a function 𝐴 depends on its
arguments, which are represented by store addresses in our
global store. Whenever the abstract values for one of these
store addresses changes, it triggers the reanalysis of function
𝐴. In this bug, dependencies are triggered even though the
(abstract) value of their referenced store address no longer
changes. This results in a non-terminating analysis, since
components continue to be added to the worklist even if no
new information can be derived.

We illustrate this bug by reusing the example program
from section 4.2.3. The analysis of this program is infinite in
the buggy analysis implementation. We add breakpoints to
the body of each component of this program to make sure
that no component in particular is analyzed continuously.
Stepping through this program a number of times reveals
that a single component is being reanalyzed continuously:
the aux component.

To reduce the number of times the analysis is suspended,
we remove all other breakpoints except the breakpoint in the
aux function. Since a component is only reanalyzed when
one of its dependencies changes, we are interested in the
argument of aux. Therefore, we adapt this breakpoint to
suspend the analysis only when the l no longer changes:

(break (not (store:changed? "l@2:17")))

As a result, the analysis suspends less frequently and we
can step directly to the problematic infinite behavior of the
analysis. Additionally, this debugger interaction gives us an
indication of which store address is to blame, and which
type of value is associated with it. This makes it easier to
find the root cause of the bug in the analysis implementation
by focussing on that specific address or looking into the
implementation of lists. However, additional logging in the
analysis implementation is required to learn more about the
dependency triggering mechanism.

4.3 Discussion

Table 3. Overview of all the meta-predicate categories used
for solving the bug

Regular Break Store Worklist Lattice

Bug 1
Bug 2
Bug 3
Bug 4
Bug 5

✓
✓
✓

✓
✓

✓

✓

✓

Table 3 depicts on overview of the features of our debug-
ger (columns) and the re-introduced bugs considered
case studies (rows). The table indicates which debugging
features were used to understand and locate each bug in
the analysis implementation. In the case studies, predicates
concerning the worklist are primarily used bugs
related to the termination of the analysis (bug 4). The store
predicates are used in most of the case studies. The reason
for their frequent usage is two-fold. First, the lattice predi-ates operate on abstract values from the store. Thus, each
time a lattice used, at least one store predicate
is required. Second, many bugs involve the store in some
capacity. For example, bug 1 occurs because of a mistake in
the allocation of pairs. Bug 2 is in that the resulting
value in the store is incorrectly updated, or not updated at
all. The usage of the store meta-predicates in bug 5 is more
subtle, here it is used to detect the absence of changes to the
store in order to break when dependencies are triggered for
addresses that no longer change.

Bug 3 is interesting since it precludes components from be-
ing analyzed. Even worse, by preventing a component from
being analyzed, its return value is always ⊥ which causes
the analysis to halt early. In the program used for illustrating
bug 3, this problem was rather obvious (i.e., the analysis
results were empty). However, for larger programs, finding
which component was prevented from being analyzed might
be more difficult. Breakpoints related to the set of analyzed
components (i.e., the seen set) might help to locate these
components. However, such breakpoints are not included in
our debugger and require further investigation. Therefore,
only non-conditional breakpoints were used for debugging
bug 3 in the case study.

5 Limitations & Future Work
As illustrated in the debugging scenario for bug 3, our current
approach lacks meta-predicates to deal with components that
fail to be analyzed. We argue that additional breakpoints that
express properties on the dependency graph and the set of
seen components can partially solve this problem, but leave
this as future work.

Furthermore, our conditional breakpoints are stateless,
meaning that keep any state between evalua-
tions of the conditional breakpoints. We solve this problem
in our current approach by introducing history-aware break-
points such as wl:prev-length. However, as future work,
stateful predicates can be considered to allow developers to
keep track of an arbitrary state between the evaluation of
breakpoints. To this end, language extensions and extensions
to the predicate evaluator are needed.

Finally, whereas we establish a link between the analyzed
code and the analysis implementation through fine-grained
meta-predicates and visualisations of the analysis’ state,
Nguyen et al. [7] establish a clear correspondence between


SLE ’23, October 23–24, 2023, Cascais, Portugal

Mats Van Molle, Bram Vandenbogaerde, and Coen De Roover

the analyzed code and the code of the analysis implemen-
tation by pairing them together visually in the debugger
interface itself. Our debugger already keeps track of this
information internally, but does not visualize it. However,
we acknowledge that this pairing could be beneficial for
understanding the analysis implementation as well as for
finding the bug in the analysis implementation itself. We
consider the integration of our debugger with an Integrated
Development Environment as future work.

6 Related Work
Charguéraud et al. [2] propose a double-debugger for de-
bugging Javascript interpreters using domain-specific break-
points. These domain-specific breakpoints are about the in-
ternal interpreter state, and can be anchored within the inter-
preted program through predicates about line numbersthe contents of local variables. Similarly, Kruck et al. [11, 12]
recognize that interpreter developers want to reason about
the structure of the interpreted program and propose multi-
level debugging. Their approach mainly focusses on the rep-
resentation of call stack frames in a debugging environment,
and represents them both from the perspective of the inter-
preted program as well as from the perspective of the inter-
preter itself. Similar approaches have been proposed for tai-
loring debuggers to specific applications or frameworks [14].
This allows developers to reason about the behavior of the
interpreter more easily.

Both approaches are, however, not cross-level. They either
provide domain-specific breakpoints on the meta level (e.g.,
breakpoints about the current line number of the interpreter),
or do not provide them at all. Our breakpoints are placed
in the analyzed code (base level) allowing the developer to
specify the location where they are evaluated. Furthermore,
the conditions in these breakpoints express properties of the
analysis state (meta level) rather than the analyzed program
(base level). These breakpoints therefore interact with each
other and cross the boundaries between the base and the
meta level.

Nguyen et al. [7] propose a tool called VisuFlow which
is tailored to the visualisation of data flow analyses imple-
mented in the Soot framework [13]. However, they do not
propose cross-level domain-specific breakpoints and their
approach is only applicable to data flow analyses. Static anal-
yses based on the abstract definitional interpreter approach,
however, have been shown to be applicable in many use-
cases, including control flow analysis [1, 16, 20], data flow
analysis [6] and soft contract verification [15, 19].

7 Conclusion
We proposed cross-level debugging for static analysis imple-
mentations, which moves stepping and breakpoints from the
base level to the meta level. More specifically, we proposed

domain-specific visualisations for visually depicting the cur-
rent state of the analysis. We argue that this visualisation
makes it easier to understand the behavior of the analysis
and thus to locate the root cause of bugs.

Furthermore, we proposed domain-specific conditional break-

points which enable